---
layout: post
title: Thoughts On Content Consumption And Reading
---
_Me trying to figure out how to make worth the hours that I spend consuming science related content on the internet_

I watch a huge amount of content everyday. From morning to night, just gazing at the phone and consuming content. But as bad as it may sound, most of the content I watch/read/listen to are science related and on thinking about it, all of it, if memorized (at least 10% of it), would help me a great deal in life. I feel that the main difference between reading a good book and watching say an episode of “talks at google” is the amount of time for which one is being bound to that topic/idea. In the case of reading a book, one has to commit to it several hours, possibly spread over a few days, and that is what makes a book superior to the other kinds of content consumption. That ability to think about the idea and let it take over your mind for a longer amount of time is what makes what we “read”, stick to us. A video or a podcast on the other hand, in addition to already being short, say an hour or a couple at max, is further shortened by playing it at double speed, mainly due to our “extremely busy” lifestyle.

Further, the gradual output of information in the case of a book, is replaced by the superfast output of fact after fact after fact, on the video/podcast, which the creator took several days to curate, if not months. This process often takes days and involves reading a ton of research papers, watching several videos, even possibly reading a book or two along the way (all depending on what kind of content is being created). And this process of picking a topic to explain/make a video on. Research about it,  find sources, write a draft, change the sequence of dialogues multiple times over so that each time it makes a percentage more sense to the consumer is extremely beneficial to the creator. As for the consumer, the video makes little or no difference at all. Especially when you binge youtube for 3 straight hours watching all the random but surprisingly interesting and precisely curated videos that the “mysterious youtube algorithm” keeps throwing at you. And yes, this includes videos of guys chanting pewdiepie from dawn to dusk and the videos of people reacting to videos reacting to videos created by themselves. But amidst all of this mess, all of this clutter, there are these beautifully crafted, extremely interesting, and also often very informative videos, like the recent mark rober video where he builds an entire wipe-out course for squirrels  to keep them from eating seeds off of a bird feeder that he hangs in his backyard, or that smarter everyday video where destin explains neural plasticity by trying to ride an inverse steering bicycle, or the plethora of 3b1b videos explaining complex mathematical equations with so much simplicity. If you're someone like me, you probably spend a huge chunk of your awake-time, watching videos on yt or listening to podcasts on the web. Albeit that a major part of this huge pile of content consumed everyday is related to science/math/tech, how much of this gained information is being retained, and how much of it is really useful to the consumer. 

This got me thinking about ways in which I can memorize the information that I gain, by binge watching these science videos or gain by listening to some space related joe rogan podcast. I really don't know how to go about doing that. 

One thing that comes to my mind is, writing short blogs about all the interesting concepts that I encounter on the web everyday, would not only encourage me to explore these topics in detail, thereby allowing me to spend more time, thinking about the related ideas (the sort of which one would get from reading a book), but also being able to present the extensive research in a way that is useful for others with lesser time in their hands. I recently got introduced to this podcast named “anthropocene reviewed”, which is based on the idea of reviewing abstract concepts along with a short story, by the speaker, and also giving each of these short reviews a rating on a 5 star scale. I really fell in love with the idea. Here's a link to one of my favorite episodes of the podcast - [Humanity's Temporal Range](https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/anthropocene-reviewed/episodes/anthropocene-reviewed-humanitys-temporal-range)

In short i'm trying to figure out a way to create content based on what I learn online in a way that it helps me gain, and retain the knowledge by digging deep into the science/math behind certain topics, while also helping someone else foray into these topics more easily.

Basically want to start writing a science blog. But don't exactly know how to go about it.

Please do DM/comment me your thoughts/suggestions if you're reading this. 
 
Thank You
